Chapter 1: Intro to Linux
Chapter 1: Introduction to Linux
1. The Foundation: Hardware vs. Software
Every computer is built upon two fundamental pillars:

Hardware: The physical "body" and internal fuel.
Resources: CPU (the brain), Memory/RAM (short-term fuel), and Disk (long-term storage).
I/O Devices: How the computer interacts with the world (keyboards, screens, sensors).
Software: The "intelligence." These are the coded features that tell the hardware what to do (e.g., a calculator’s ability to remember a previous sum).
2. The OS and the Kernel
An Operating System (OS) is the complete package that defines a computer's behavior. It consists of two parts:

The Kernel: The "Manager." It is the core software that bridges the gap between hardware and software, ensuring resources are distributed fairly.
Collection of Software: The tools and programs that enable specific features for the user.


3. The UNIX Philosophy (1969)
UNIX was created to modernize computing by making systems simpler and more portable. It introduced a modular approach:

Small & Composable: Instead of one giant, clunky program, UNIX uses small tools that do one thing well.
The LEGO Effect: These tools are designed to be plugged into one another to solve complex problems.
Developer-Friendly: It included the very programs needed to build new programs, making it a self-sustaining ecosystem.


4. The Birth of GNU/Linux
The Linux we use today is actually a combination of two separate projects:

GNU Project: An ambitious movement to rewrite UNIX-style tools from scratch as "Open Source" (free to view, edit, and share). They had the tools, but lacked a Kernel.
Linux: Created by Linus Torvalds, this was the missing piece—an open-source, UNIX-like kernel.
The Result: GNU/Linux. A fully open-source operating system where the "engine" (Linux) runs the "tools" (GNU).


5. User Interfaces: The Power of Text
A User Interface (UI) is simply how a human interacts with a machine.

Fixed Interfaces: An oven has a dial. It can only do what the dial allows.
Flexible Interfaces: A typewriter uses text. Text is versatile because the combinations of words are infinite.
The Evolution of the CLI
In the early days, users controlled computers via Teletypes (text-based input and output). While modern computers use visual displays, the logic remains:

The CLI (Command Line Interface): A "text engine" that translates typed commands into powerful actions.
Terminal Emulators/Shells: These are modern programs that "pretend" to be old-time teletypes.

Why do we still use it? Unlike clicking a button (which does one specific thing), text allows for "flexible and ever-expanding usage." It is the difference between choosing a meal from a fixed menu and having a conversation with a chef.


💡 Summary Memory Aid
Hardware is the body; Software is the mind.
The Kernel is the manager; the OS is the whole office.
UNIX is the ancestor that taught us to keep tools small and modular.
GNU (Tools) + Linux (Kernel) = The Open Source OS.
The CLI is not "old"—it is a high-precision tool that uses the infinite flexibility of language to control a machine.

Chapter 2: CLI Basics
1. The Anatomy of a Command
In a terminal, the Prompt usually looks like this: user@host_name ~/Current_Directory $

When you type a command, it follows this structure: command [argument]  (Example: echo hello)

Command: The action or program to run (echo).
Argument: Parameters passed to the program to control its behavior (hello).
Flags: A specific type of argument starting with a hyphen (e.g., -h). They act as "switches" to toggle features.


2. Built-ins vs. Programs
Not every command you type is a separate file on the disk.

External Programs: Separate files stored in the system.
Shell Built-ins: Commands implemented directly inside the shell (e.g., help, exit, alias).
The which Test: If you run which [command] and it returns no path, it is likely a shell built-in.


3. The Three Standard Streams
Every program has three "pipes" or sequences of data:

stdin (Standard Input): Data flowing into the program.
stdout (Standard Output): The "normal" data flowing out.
stderr (Standard Error): Error messages flowing out.

Note: On your screen, stdout and stderr look identical. Redirection is the only way to tell them apart (demultiplexing).


4. Redirection Operators
You can override the shell’s default behavior (printing to screen) by using operators:

Operator
Action
Description
>
Overwrite
Sends stdout to a file, deleting existing content.
>>
Append
Sends stdout to a file, adding to the end.
2>
Error Redirect
Sends only stderr to a file.
<
Input Redirect
Feeds the contents of a file into a program’s stdin.
;
Semicolon
Separates commands, running them one after another.



5. The Pipe (|)
The pipe is the ultimate realization of the UNIX philosophy.

Function: It links the stdout of the first program directly to the stdin of the second program.
Example: cat file.txt | grep "search_term"
Grep usually takes a filename, but without one, it becomes an interactive filter for whatever data is piped into it.


6. Interactive Programs & Signals
Some programs (like man or base64) are interactive. They "block" the shell, meaning your keystrokes go directly to the program rather than the command line.

man: Opens a dedicated interface for documentation.
Ctrl-D: A crucial signal. It tells an interactive program that the input has ended (End of File/EOF), allowing the program to finish execution and return you to the shell.


💡 Summary Memory Aid
Arguments change what the program processes; Flags change how it processes it.
> is a megaphone to a new file; >> is a megaphone to the end of an old file.
The Pipe (|) is the "glue" that connects small tools into a powerful machine.
Ctrl-D is how you say "I'm done talking" to an interactive program.

Chapter 3: CLI Advanced
1. Package Management (apt)
On Debian-based systems, apt is the primary tool for managing software.

apt update: Refreshes the local list of available packages (does not actually upgrade software).
apt install [pkg]: Downloads and installs a package.
apt remove [pkg]: Uninstalls a package.
apt list --installed: Shows all packages currently present on the system.


2. Processes and Signals
A Process is a single instance of a running program.

ps -ef: Displays running processes.
-e: Everything (all processes).
-f: Full format (extra details).
$$: A shell variable that represents the Process ID (PID) of your current shell.
kill: Sends a "Signal" to a process to change its state.
Critical Signals:
SIGTERM (15): The default signal. It asks a program to stop politely. Programs (like bash) can choose to ignore this.
SIGKILL (9): The "Nuclear Option." It is handled by the Kernel, not the program. The process is terminated immediately and cannot be ignored.


3. Job Control
A Job is a process started by the shell that hasn't detached from the terminal.

Action
Signal/Command
Effect
Interrupt
Ctrl-C (SIGINT)
Requests the job to stop immediately (can be ignored).
Suspend
Ctrl-Z (SIGSTP)
Pauses the job and puts it in the background.
List Jobs
jobs
Shows all current background/suspended jobs.
Foreground
fg %1
Brings job #1 back to the front (active).
Background
bg %1
Tells suspended job #1 to run in the background.
Start in BG
&
Adding & to the end of a command starts it in the background immediately.


Warning: Running a job in the background without redirecting its output will result in text being "streamed" over your terminal, making it messy.


4. Exit Codes & Logical Operators
Every command returns an Exit Code (or Exit Status) when it finishes.

0: Success ("OK").
1 or 2: Error (varying severity).
$?: A special variable that holds the exit code of the last command executed.
Conditional Execution:
&& (AND): Run the second command only if the first succeeded (Exit 0).
Example: mkdir test && cd test
|| (OR): Run the second command only if the first failed (Exit NOT 0).
Example: cd folder || echo "Folder does not exist"


5. System Monitoring
Tools to check your hardware resources:

free: Shows system-wide RAM usage.
top: Provides a real-time, interactive view of CPU and RAM usage.
du [file/dir]: (Disk Usage) Shows how much space a specific file or directory occupies.


💡 Summary Memory Aid
update finds the menu; install buys the food.
SIGTERM is a request; SIGKILL is an order.
$$ is "me" (the current shell).
0 is the only "Happy" exit code in Linux; everything else is an error.
&& is "Then"; || is "Else".
Chapter 4: Users
Chapter 4: Users, Groups, and Permissions
1. The Multi-User System
Linux is designed to be shared by multiple people. The Kernel is responsible for maintaining separation between them.

Isolation: Users have private files and personal preferences.
Protection: Users cannot access each other's files or signal (kill) each other’s processes.
Authentication: Access is controlled via passwords and identity checks.
User Management Commands
useradd -m -s [shell] [user]: Creates a new user.
-m: Creates a home directory.
-s: Sets the default shell (e.g., /bin/bash).
id: Displays the UID (User ID) and GID (Group ID) for a user.
passwd: An interactive program to set or change a user's password.
su [user]: "Switch User"—allows you to log in as another user.


2. Root and Privileged Access
Root is the administrative superuser.

UID 0: The root user always has the ID of 0.
Absolute Power: Standard permissions do not apply to root; it can access or change anything.
sudo (SuperUser DO)
sudo allows a permitted user to execute a command as root.

How it works: It checks the /etc/sudoers file to see if the user is authorized.
sudo bash: Opens a new shell session with root privileges.
sudo su root: Logs into the root account without needing the root password (if the user has sudo rights).


3. Groups and Collaboration
Groups allow you to assign permissions to multiple people at once.

Primary Group: Every user has exactly one. Files created by the user are owned by this group.
Secondary Groups: A user can belong to many. This is how "privileged" access is often granted (e.g., being in the sudo group).
groupadd / groupdel: Used to create or delete groups (requires sudo).


4. Identity Files
Linux uses simple text files to act as user databases:

/etc/passwd: Defines users. Contains: Username, UID, Primary GID, Home Path, and Shell Path. (This is why ls can show names instead of just numbers).
/etc/group: Defines groups. Contains: Group name, GID, and the list of member users.


5. File Permissions (rwx)
Permissions are divided into three categories: Owner, Group, and Others.
The Math of Permissions (Octal)
Permissions use a binary-based numbering system. This allows any combination of permissions to add up to a unique number:

Read (r) = 4 (Binary 100)
Write (w) = 2 (Binary 010)
Execute (x) = 1 (Binary 001)

Examples:

7 (4+2+1) = Full access (rwx)
5 (4+1) = Read and Execute (r-x)
640 = Owner can rw-, Group can r--, Others have ---.
Changing Ownership & Permissions
chmod: Changes permissions. Only the owner or root can use this.
chown: Changes the owner or group. Only root can change who owns a file.


6. Directory Permissions
Permissions behave differently for directories than for regular files:

Permission
For Files
For Directories
Read (r)
View content.
List files inside the directory.
Write (w)
Modify content.
Create, Delete, or Rename files inside.
Execute (x)
Run as a program.
Enter the directory (CD) and access files.


Note: Write (w) on a directory is useless without Execute (x), because you can't modify what you can't enter.


💡 Summary Memory Aid
Root (UID 0) is the "God Mode" of the system.
/etc/passwd is the "Who's Who" list.
4-2-1: Read, Write, Run.
chmod is for what you can do; chown is for who you are.
For directories: x is the key to the door; r is the ability to see what's in the room.

Chapter 5: Files
1. Executables and Sensitive Files
ELF (Executable and Linkable Format): The standard binary format for Linux executable files. Unlike text scripts, these are compiled into machine code.
/etc/shadow: A highly protected file that stores encrypted user passwords.


2. Task Scheduling with Cron
Cron is a background service that executes tasks at specific times based on text files called "crontabs."
The 5-Field Syntax
A cron task is defined by five time fields followed by the command: Minute  Hour  Day  Month  Weekday  command

Field
Range
Example
Minute
0–59
*/5 (Every 5 mins)
Hour
0–23
5 (At 5 AM)
Day
1–31
1 (1st of the month)
Month
1–12
12 (December)
Weekday
0–6
0 (Sunday)


* (Asterisk): Matches "any" or "every."
/N: Matches "every N" (e.g., */10 in the minute field means every 10 minutes).


3. Services and systemd
A Service (or Daemon) is a program designed to run continuously in the background (e.g., rsyslogd for logging or cron for scheduling).

systemd: The "Initer." It is the first process started by the kernel (PID 1). It is responsible for starting and managing all other services.
.service files: Located in /etc/systemd/system/, these files tell systemd how and when to run a specific program.
systemctl: The primary utility used to start, stop, restart, or check the status of services.


4. Archiving and Compression with tar
Archiving bundles multiple files into one; compression shrinks that bundle.
The tar Command Flags
Operations:
-c: Create a new archive.
-x: Extract an archive.
-t: Test/List contents without extracting.
Modifiers:
-f: Specify the Filename (Must be the last flag in a sequence).
-v: Verbose (list files as they are processed).
-p: Preserve permissions/ownership (vital for backups).
-C: Change directory (extract to a specific path).
Compression Types:
-z: gzip (Fast, standard).
-j: bzip2 (Smaller size, slower).
-J: xz (Smallest size, slowest).

Example: tar -cvzf backup.tar.gz /home/user (Create a Verbose Gzip File).


5. The "Everything is a File" Philosophy
Linux exposes hardware and system information through the filesystem, allowing you to use standard tools (like cat or echo) to interact with the kernel.
Special Directories
/proc: A virtual filesystem providing Process and hardware info. Each numbered folder corresponds to a PID.
/dev: Contains Device files representing hardware.
Block Devices (b): Handle data in blocks (e.g., Hard Drives, SSDs).
Character Devices (c): Handle data as a stream of characters (e.g., Keyboards, Teletypes).
Virtual Devices (Pseudo-devices)
/dev/null: The "Black Hole." Any data sent here disappears.
/dev/random & /dev/urandom: Sources for generating random data.
Symbolic Links (Symlinks)
Represented by file type l.
A "shortcut" that points to another file path.
Created using the ln -s command.


💡 Summary Memory Aid
Cron fields: "Big Timers" (Min, Hour, Day, Month, Week).
systemd is the "Parent of all Processes" (PID 1).
tar -f: Always put the "f" next to the filename.
/proc is for Processes; /dev is for Devices.
Block (b) is for storage; Character (c) is for streams.

